The Project Gutenberg EBook of More About the Squirrels, by Eleanor Tyrrell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: More About the Squirrels

Author: Eleanor Tyrrell

Illustrator: Honor C. Appleton

Release Date: January 25, 2016 [EBook #51031]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)






Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The squirrel sprang here, there, and everywhere. _See
page 29._]

       *       *       *       *       *




MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS


  BY
  ELEANOR TYRRELL
  AUTHOR OF “HOW I TAMED THE WILD SQUIRRELS,” ETC.

  THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, LTD.
  LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]




CONTENTS.


  PART I. MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS  15

  PART II. THE TRAGEDY              45

  PART III. FREEDOM AND HAPPINESS   65

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]




LIST OF COLOURED PLATES.


  The squirrel sprang here, there, and everywhere  _Frontispiece_

  The snow was falling so thickly I could scarcely see him     32

  I saw them huddled together on the floor of the cage         48

  Laurence hid himself in the twinkling of an eye              64

  She coquetted with the birds round the drinking pan          80

  Seven furry infants!... The heartlessness of it!             96

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]




FOREWORD.


Amongst the many satisfactions of writing is that of receiving letters
of appreciation from unknown friends. From all parts of the United
Kingdom, from Canada and from South Africa, animal lovers have written
to me expressing their pleasure in reading “How I Tamed the Wild
Squirrels,” published in the autumn of 1914 by Messrs. Nelson and Sons,
Ltd. The note most frequently struck is that of gratitude for something
to think about that had lessened for a while the sadness and depression
caused by this terrible war.

That many of these correspondents have asked for more tidings of Fritz
and his companions, must be my excuse for putting forth another book
about them--again illustrated by Miss Appleton’s clever and delicate
pen and brush.

Fritz has now enjoyed the liberty of the garden for four years. His
first wife deserted him after the advent--from the country of the
Huns--of a fierce little red compatriot, who would brook no rival.
She and he have since produced a most charming orange and gray son,
who happily shows all his father’s sweet confidence and none of his
mother’s truculence.

Young Fritz is now a daily visitor to my bedroom, and, to the joy of
our young people, sometimes finds his way to other parts of the house.

Mr. and Mrs. Laurence Housman are rarely seen. Fritz, as the
first-comer, has stood his ground and chased them far. Occasionally in
bitter weather, or in early spring (when food is most scarce), they
will furtively creep back to the old squirrel-house--the door of which
is always open--to steal the secreted nuts of the Fritz family. And,
as proof of their domestic felicity, comes sometimes a mysterious and
beautiful young black-tailed squirrel--a tail orange-tipped, with
delicate markings of gray.

Is it possible that these two fiery-red beings have produced a creature
so unlike themselves? I think it is. Red-haired human parents sometimes
have black-haired children, so why should not squirrels?

In Nature study one is always learning, refuting former deductions
and coming to conclusions which, after more patient observation,
prove themselves false. Thus I recollect bemoaning my little Fritz’s
miserable and mangy appearance in the month of July, after six months
of liberty. And I said in “How I Tamed the Wild Squirrels” that I
thought these little animals, given proper food and space for exercise,
are happier and better off in captivity than when running wild. I have
since learned that all male adult squirrels look miserable and mangy
in July, because they are then “changing their tails.”

One hears people exclaim: “I have just seen a dear little squirrel. It
must be quite a baby, for it had no hair on its tail.” Young squirrels
in July, and long before, are very fully furred, and have delightful
tails. It is their fathers who are going about thus dilapidated. The
mothers change a little later in the year.

But space forbids more on this fascinating subject. My thanks are due
to Messrs. Nelson for turning out both books so attractively, and at a
price so moderate. And especially are they due to Miss Appleton for her
careful and charming illustrations.

Go forth then, little book, with my love to all squirrel lovers young
and old.

  ELEANOR TYRRELL.

  ST. KATHERINE’S, HOOK HEATH, ABOVE WOKING.




PART I. MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS.


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: St Katherine’s. Hook Heath.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS.

As I am often asked about the little beasts whose adventures were set
forth in “How I Tamed the Wild Squirrels,” perhaps a further account of
my furry friends will not come amiss.

I no longer keep any of them confined. After the death of three in the
winter of 1914, I resolved that, dear and fascinating as they were as
little companions in my room, I would never have them caged and in
artificial conditions again.

There are two pairs of Germans loose in our little wood--Mr. and Mrs.
Fritz and Mr. and Mrs. Laurence; while the wild Surrey ones, the little
natives, come to the garden from the firs on the railway cutting.

There is no doubt that Fritz, the German, with his superior strength
and masterfulness, drove away that first little colony which I had
tamed so wonderfully. Toto had met a tragic death, killed by a
marauding cat. Tito and Tara and the dainty little thing I used to
call Miss Fritz after a time took up their quarters elsewhere. I have
since come to the conclusion that Miss Fritz was not Miss Fritz--more
probably Miss Tito. As she grew to maturity she proved herself entirely
a Surrey squirrel. There was no tint of orange or gray about her, and
she remained when full-grown as small and dainty as the rest, showing
not a sign of the German larger, coarser breed.

[Illustration]

Besides, had Fritz been her father, she would not have disappeared
from the wood. Young squirrels remain with their parents, I am told,
for a year. Fritz had been assiduous in his attentions to a very
charming squirrel with a lovely tail, whom for some time I had called
Mrs. Fritz, but she too vanished in September 1913 and left him master
of the wood.

He became very lonely. It was poor fun to be cock of the walk when
there was none to dispute his sway. Consequently, during the autumn,
he took to visiting Wych Hill, Hurstgate, and Allen House, where the
owners, also admirers of squirrels, were in the habit of hanging out
cocoanuts and other dainties to attract them.

[Illustration]

It has always been a mystery to me how he contrived to get to these
plantations across the heath without being seen. To reach them he had
to cross two wide public roads bristling with motor cars, bicycles,
errand boys, and dogs. Besides crossing these dangerous zones, he must
(unless he went a circuitous route by fir trees, quite a mile round)
have traversed an open gorsy heath. Had he his little runs, I wondered,
as rabbits have? And how dangerous, with watchful cats and lynx-eyed
terriers about! As long as he could keep to the trees he was safe from
the latter, but there was no consecutive belt of trees from our place
to those I have mentioned. That he arrived there, there was no doubt,
for I sometimes found him there myself, and he would come running
down the pine trees at my call. Neighbours told me of his fugitive
appearances in their gardens: “A large, red squirrel, very strong and
active.”

[Illustration]

Occasionally he stayed away from us altogether for a week or ten days.
Sometimes the food which was placed for him would not be touched, at
others it disappeared at midday, showing that he had slept away and
come over for it somewhere between eleven and twelve o’clock. When
a longer time than usual elapsed without a trace of him in wood or
garden, I was perfectly miserable, thinking that the dear, bright-eyed,
clever little thing had at last fallen a victim to boys or dogs. And
then the joy of his reappearance at my window, as intimate and cocky as
ever!

[Illustration]

I remember one morning in particular, a soft, sunny, spring-like day
in winter, I came into my room to find him, after an absence of more
than a fortnight, very hungry and very pleased with himself. He cocked
his tail on one side with a rakish air, and pranced over the carpet and
up the curtains, in the way he used to do when courting Bunty a year
ago, and showed, with all his little squirrel nature, his affection and
pleasure at our meeting again. I stuffed him with every dainty I had
till he could eat no more, and insisted on hiding the rest in the ivy
on the wall, where, as I knew, mice would steal it when night came.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meantime Peter and Rufina lived in the big cage on the wall outside my
other window.

They never became friends. As I have said in my former book, by the
time the latter had been a fortnight in the cage she was completely
mistress of the situation. She appropriated Peter’s sleeping-box, she
stole all his best nuts, and should he dare to approach her while she
was eating, she routed him fiercely. He was thankful when the short
winter day was over, and he could sneak behind the curtains in my room
and snuggle into his blue serge sleeping-bag, remaining there till next
morning.

I must explain that Peter was a little English squirrel, whom I had
reared from babyhood. He was now about nine months old. Rufina was a
lady, German, bought from Devon and Co. at Bethnal Green. At this time
I had had her barely three months.

Squirrels hate a high wind. The noise in the trees makes it difficult,
I suppose, to hear enemies about. Also perhaps they fear to lose their
hold of the tossing branches. Be it as it may, I was always certain
that in a gale not a glimpse of a squirrel would be obtained all day.
Torrents of rain, too, will deter them from scampering about; their
tails get bedraggled and heavy and upset their balance. I have known
Fritz come in the rain, but it generally meant that the weather was
going to clear. I have seen him out in a wild snow squall. He spent a
quarter of an hour once on the roof of the garden squirrel-house trying
to scratch his way in through the heather thatch where a rival lived,
while the snow was falling so thickly I could scarcely see him.

[Illustration]

Young squirrels are very playful, and I think they amuse themselves
with toys.

I shall never forget my astonishment at one of Rufina’s achievements.
There had been an empty mouse-trap in my room for some weeks. It was
five or six inches long and two or three inches deep, made of wood,
with a wire top. It was not baited, and I had carefully unset it in
case Peter or Rufina playing about the room should put their noses
inside and get nipped by the spring. The father of a mouse family had
once been caught in it, and I had had some very miserable moments; but
that is another story. Ever since that tragic night his widow and
children had carefully avoided it. Still, it lay under a cupboard,
forgotten. One day I was surprised to see it on the floor of the
squirrel-house. I wondered if the housemaid had thrown it out, meaning
to take it away, and had forgotten it. The evening, however, was
closing in, and I left it alone, intending to remove it next day. Early
the following morning I was awakened by extraordinary sounds in the
cage, a bumping and a scrabbling quite unaccountable, punctuated every
now and then by the fall of something on the floor. When I got up to
look, I saw Rufina in the act of climbing up the wire netting _with the
trap in her mouth_.

[Illustration]

I watched her. She gave me a backward glance, as much as to say,
“Don’t _you_ interfere,” and recommenced her haulings and tuggings.
She dragged the thing some four feet up, and then along a wooden bar
till she got below the little platform outside the sleeping-box. Then
she made a spring, but lost her hold of the trap, and down it came
clattering to the floor. What could she want it for? It was no good
as a receptacle for storing nuts, as the spring door was closed, and
the wires were too closely set for it to be possible to push anything
through them. I came to the conclusion that she meant to place it
somewhere as a barrier to circumvent Peter.

[Illustration]

The whole of the morning was occupied by the persistent little creature
in efforts to get her plaything up to where she wanted it. It fell to
the floor quite a dozen times, but she tackled it again, every time
with unabated energy. I questioned the housemaid as to why she had
thrown it into the cage, and found that she had never touched it.
Rufina must therefore have dragged it from under the cupboard, across
the room, and by a great effort jumped with it in her mouth to the
level of the window-sill, about two and a half feet from the floor.

By the evening, however, it had disappeared, and I descried it at last
in the very topmost corner of her home. It was above the sleeping-box,
wedged into an old bicycle basket, which was nailed under the eaves.
This had some hay in it, and was used for hiding nuts. Did Rufina place
it there as a shield against Peter’s thefts?

After a day or two the trap fell down again, and I took it away, afraid
lest a little paw might be caught and wedged between the wires.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Miss Appleton kindly undertook to illustrate my first book about
the squirrels, though she stayed with us several times in order to
sketch Fritz and Bunty from life, it was found necessary for her to
have a squirrel model in her friends’ studio in London, where she was
working at the time. A wire-netting place was therefore improvised on
the roof, outside the high studio window in Kensington, and in due time
came a package from Devon and Co. labelled “LIVE SQUIRREL.”

[Illustration]

The lady artists who owned the studio were delighted at the idea of
having this little pet, and, in Miss Appleton’s absence, proceeded at
once most incautiously to open the box. They prised one end open, and
were going to bring it to the door of the cage they had prepared, when
hey! presto! there was a flash, a scurry of fur upon hands and arms,
and away went the squirrel helter-skelter over pictures, statuary,
easels, chairs, and shelves. Crash! crash! bang went glass, smashing
to atoms, down fell pictures, over went models, and a wild and
exciting uproar followed. The artists shrieked, the squirrel sprang
here, there, and everywhere in a fifty by seventy feet room crammed
indiscriminately with painters’ and sculptors’ paraphernalia.

Inarticulate with laughter, the ladies sprang after it. Faster and
faster it flew, taking wild leaps from the top of one easel to
another; pattering swiftly over angels’ wings and Mercury’s helmet,
over Clytie’s bust and the horns of Mephistopheles; diving down to the
floor, scrambling up the walls, till dismay arose as the bewildered
creature jumped upon the stove and ran along the hot-water pipes.

[Illustration]

More than an hour was spent in this breathless chase, till some one
bethought her of a tiny room across the vestibule. Setting the door
open, the frightened little beast was at length chased into this, and
the door shut. A model’s cloak was flung over the runaway and twisted
round the struggling bundle, which was transferred to its future home.

The ladies of the studio were great admirers of Mr. Laurence Housman,
so the new arrival was named after him by common consent.

Laurence spent the following four and a half months (from the beginning
of November till the middle of March) in a cage about three feet by
two, which was fastened against a chimney-pot on the roof.

I have often wondered what his nights were like, with London cats all
round.

He was furnished with a sleeping-box, with a hinged lid. I once saw him
asleep, as my friend opened the top. Anything neater and warmer could
not well be imagined. Wood-wool was tightly wedged round the inside of
the box first, then came a thick layer of cotton-wool, all of which
he had arranged himself. In the middle, a curled red centre, lay the
squirrel fast asleep, his face completely hidden. The box lid fitted
tightly down over this compact mass, and the two little holes at either
end, through which he crept in and out, were so small, I wondered how
he could get any air at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I went away for the Christmas week of 1913, I could not leave
Peter and Rufina the run of my bedroom. The house being shut up and
empty, with no one to see after them, they would have made hay of
all my possessions. So I hung the sleeping-bag on a nail on the wall
inside the cage, and shut and bolted the window, giving Smithers, the
gardener, instructions to feed them and replenish the water-jar from
outside; this he was accustomed to do by means of a ladder. He told me
that Rufina sometimes jumped out of the bag when he put his hand in to
scatter nuts; so poor Peter must have been forced to give up even this
pet hiding-place.

When I returned from Devonshire on 1st January, both squirrels were
invisible. As the weather was bitterly cold, I was a little anxious
when night came on lest their jar of water should be frozen; so I
opened the window, and, finding a solid block of ice, I took the vessel
in and replenished it. I mention this, as I fancy my action was the
cause of the tragedy which followed. The casement opened backwards upon
the inner wall of the cage, against which, upon a nail, hung the blue
cloth bag I have spoken of. The casement would just touch this bag and
shake it, though it was protected a little by a branch of the shrub
which grew up through the cage.

[Illustration]

I did not guess that Rufina was asleep in the bag; the night was pitch
dark. I saw nothing, and closing the window again, went to bed.

[Illustration: The snow was falling so thickly I could scarcely see
him. _See page 24._]

Next morning, hearing a tiny pattering about eight o’clock, I got
up to peep and see my little pets. What was my astonishment and
distress to see Rufina’s little form dangling, stiff and cold, from the
platform against the sleeping-box. Above, there glared down upon me the
horror-struck face of Peter, with eyes starting out of his head, and
ears frantically bristling. Only for a second, for, catching sight of
me, he bolted precipitately. I opened the window, jumped on the sill,
and stretching up as far as I could, felt Rufina’s little body. It was
quite stiff and quite cold. Her head was caught and jammed between
the platform and the sleeping-box; there was the space of a couple of
inches or so between the two. It seemed an inexplicable thing that a
squirrel should get its head into an interstice from which it could not
withdraw it, or that, having got its whole head in, it should not have
been able to draw its shoulders after it.

I think and hope that in her struggles she may have broken her neck
at once; she had no purchase below with which to help herself. The
accident could never have happened in the daylight. I was convinced,
upon reflection, that my opening the casement overnight had startled
her into jumping out of the serge bag, and that she had blindly made
for the hole in the sleeping-box some three feet above. She must have
missed the perch from which she always scrambled upon the platform, and
from thence to the nest.

This nesting-box and platform had been in the same relative positions
for a year and a half. No other squirrel had jammed its head in between
them; nor would Rufina have made the mistake had she not been in the
dark, and blind and stupid with sleep.

[Illustration]

These conclusions came to me afterwards. For the moment I extricated
the little body with difficulty from the death-trap, and tried for
nearly an hour to bring back life. So amazed and puzzled was I at
first that I could not believe she had hanged herself. I thought she
was merely frozen; for it had been a bitterly cold night, with ice
everywhere. I brought her to my fire, and strove by moving her little
arms backwards and forwards to bring breath back into the lungs. I
chafed her tiny close-shut claws; I held her by the fire, and rubbed
her beautiful little body. She was in such perfect condition, and so
exquisitely clean and sweet!

When all hope was abandoned, I laid her gently on the floor of the
cage to see what Peter would do, and whether he would show any sign of
grief. At sight of me at the window he fled, wildly jibbering, stamping
his feet, and screaming. Here was fresh lead on my heart. It was bad
enough to lose Rufina, but that Peter should look upon me as her
murderer was the sharpest cut of all!

[Illustration]

He was angry and horror-struck, but by no means grief-stricken,
however, for a few minutes later I heard him cracking nuts, busy over
his breakfast.

[Illustration]

To most of us when a tragedy like this happens, the feeling is “to have
no more pets.” But Rufina had never been what Bunty was. She had never
sat on my hand, or played with me, or come at my call, or nipped my
fingers to make me quicker. She had not won her way into my heart as
that first little Surrey squirrel had done. She had, it is true, just
begun to come into my room and eat fearlessly, and I had had great
hopes of winning her confidence as spring came on. But this hope was
now shattered.

It was dismal to have nothing to play with. Peter continued so angry
that he would not let me see him. Moreover, my plan of a mate of his
own nationality for Fritz was frustrated. I had resolved to let Rufina
loose with him in the wood when March arrived, and here was the blunt
and miserable end to all my hopes of little ones.

[Illustration]

A week or so afterwards, therefore, found me inquiring of Messrs. Devon
and Co. if haply they could find me another German female squirrel,
warranted young and healthy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few days Ruby arrived. We had missed meeting her at the station,
and the little package came by the midday delivery van.

I expected Peter to be much annoyed by the advent of this new
trespasser in his domain. He had never for two minutes been on friendly
terms with Rufina. In fact, to judge from squirrel signs and tokens,
he hated her; but the same day that Ruby arrived, we found the two
amicably cracking nuts together.

[Illustration]

The newcomer was very red, as Rufina had been when she first came
in October. I was a little surprised at this, for it was now
winter--January 1914--and Rufina’s coat had long since taken on a
lovely pearly gray which, with the undergrowth of red and an autumn
tail, gave her quite a distinguished air.

Ruby was a dear little kittenish creature, very fond of play. She was
dreadfully afraid of me at first, and much too suspicious to venture
inside my room. The sight of me at the window sent her flying into the
safe shelter of the sleeping-box, and once there she would, like all
the others of her sex, swear at Peter, and dig her little claws into
his nose if he tried to get in too. After a week or so, however, he was
allowed to get in at the back entrance, and though there were always
some expostulations, he was not turned out.

She would come into the room when I was not there, and eat her fill of
nuts on the inverted lid of the clothes-basket. The weather was quite
mild just then, and she seemed to like her quarters better than any of
the former new arrivals had done.

[Illustration]

She had a dear little face, a lovely red coat, and a beautiful plumy
tail. She kept herself exquisitely clean, and spent a good deal of time
over her toilet. Naturally, it being the depth of winter, she spent a
great many hours asleep.

[Illustration]

It is evident that caged squirrels sleep a great deal more, especially
in winter, than when they are at large in the woods. Fritz was
constantly to be seen, at least twice a day for a couple of hours at
a time, bounding about the trees. And I used to notice the wild ones,
the year before, very active even in the snow. A biting east wind would
keep them snug in their nests, or a cold pitiless rain continuing all
day. Otherwise they were nearly as active in winter as in summer,
with this great difference, that whereas in summer 4 a.m. would find
them at my window, their morning toilet finished and their appetites
keen, in winter they did not appear at all till between eight and nine
o’clock, and by 3 p.m. they had curled themselves up for the night. In
the summer, I have heard them cracking nuts at 8 p.m. I think they all
sleep from about 11 a.m. to 1 p.m., winter or summer.

[Illustration]

I often came upon Fritz having forty winks, on a comfortable branch
sheltered from the wind, in the daytime. Squirrels’ claws are so strong
and flexible, and cling so firmly, that there is no danger of their
falling from any perch, awake or asleep.

[Illustration]

It was very interesting and amusing to watch Ruby as she became more
and more used to seeing me about. I would open the casement into the
squirrel cage, and go back to bed and watch. This cage was built on
to the wall outside my window; it was five or six feet high, and
about three feet broad, with a good wooden floor, and what made it
delightfully home-like for squirrels was that an evergreen shrub grew
inside against the wall right up to the eaves. Ruby would clamber
down the central pole, which, with perches nailed upon it, made a
capital substitute for a tree trunk, and would come peeping round the
casement, to look for nuts which would be on a chair, or on the tall
clothes-basket near by. Her little pointed ears, with their pretty
tufts, would be sharply cocked, her whiskers quivering nervously, and
her tail erect but turned back at the tip in the form of a query. Then
as I made no sign of movement she would gain confidence, and venture
farther in. When she got a nut and sat up to eat it, breaking the shell
so cleverly in two halves, and keeping one half in her paws as a little
cup, while nibbling it her ears would come close together, and her
tail would curl comfortably right over her dainty little head. She was
a charming picture as she sat up, showing her snow-white waistcoat,
holding her food between her wee thumbs, her little jaws going like
lightning, her brilliant eyes keeping a sharp lookout towards my part
of the room--ready to vanish in a second should I dare to move.

[Illustration]

And then would come another nervous and anxious little face; this was
Peter, hoping that there would be something left for him. But Ruby
would scold and grumble; and he, silently withdrawing, would wait till
her ladyship had finished.

[Illustration]




PART II. THE TRAGEDY.


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

THE TRAGEDY.

We had a very cold snap the last fortnight in January. Morning after
morning the water, and also the milk, in the squirrel-house were frozen
into solid blocks of ice. I did not worry. I thought squirrels were
such hardy little animals. The year before, Bunty and Fritz had lived
happily through the same conditions, and been healthy and well all
the time. I did not take into account that both these squirrels, being
so tame and confiding, were never afraid to come inside the room, and
often spent the coldest nights sleeping together in the serge bag
hanging behind the curtains. This must have kept them very warm all
night. Peter and Ruby were, on the contrary, so wild and timid that
nothing would induce them to remain long in my room.

[Illustration]

Little Peter, it is true, did often slip into the serge bag in the
daytime; but the maid, drawing the curtains at night, annoyed and
startled him, and he generally bolted for the cage.

I consoled myself with the thought that he and Ruby would keep quite
warm cuddled up together in the sleeping-box. And besides, was not
Fritz exceedingly well and lively all the time out of doors?

[Illustration: I saw them huddled together on the floor of the cage.
_See page 54._]

Poor little things! I don’t think they did sleep together. The box
was partitioned inside, and I think each kept entirely to its own
compartment; and Peter, being the male, would come off worst as to
nesting material.

[Illustration]

I noticed that he was not well on the 25th January. The entry in my
diary is: “Peter looks miserable, eats scarcely anything, and sleeps
twenty-three hours and three-quarters out of the twenty-four.”

If then I had only known! If I had kept him inside my room, furnished
the serge bag with heaps of cotton wool, and never let him spend the
night in the outside cage, I should in all probability have saved his
little life.

It never entered my head at this time that he had got a chill. I
thought he was “out of sorts” with the approach of spring. I remembered
that Bunty had seemed seedy early in February the year before, and
that with complete change of diet she had quickly recovered. I
remembered that I had given her meal-worms, which she ate greedily from
my hand.

“Finger-sauce” always tempted her, whereas my poor, wild little Peter
would never come near me. He would feed while I was in the room, but if
I stirred so much as a hand would be off as fast as he could go. This
was most disheartening after nine months’ captivity, and after having
reared him from babyhood. There was something inherently untamable in
him, and though I longed inexpressibly to mother and warm and coax him,
I was powerless to make him better. His weakness increased, he became
cruelly emaciated, and I was compelled to watch day by day the advance
of a mortal illness.

He would never eat from my hand, and though I put meal-worms into his
food dish, he would not touch them. Sunflower seeds at this time were
almost the only things he would eat, and but few of them. I was afraid
that an exclusive diet of them was bad for his liver, and therefore
gave them but sparingly. Poor little fellow! had I only known it, they
were the best food for him, being most nutritious.

His fur was staring, and he never seemed to have strength enough to
clean himself. All his little lickings and bitings and scratchings
ceased. As the days passed he became more and more feeble. I only
saw him for five or ten minutes in the twenty-four hours. He became
painfully thin; his lustrous eyes were dim and apparently sunk in their
sockets, instead of bulging out as all squirrels’ eyes do.

[Illustration]

What vexed me was my powerlessness, and his pitiful shrinking from me.
When I tried to coax him with endearing words, and food in my hand,
he would feebly scramble away from me and cease eating altogether.
“Why, oh, why!” I asked myself bitterly, “did I ever have squirrels in
confinement?”

Fritz was perfectly well and strong out in the open, bounding about
from tree to tree, and voraciously hungry whenever he visited the stump
or the nut traps.

Still I never guessed that Peter was suffering from a chill.
“Squirrels,” I read in a natural history book--no natural history books
tell one much about them--“squirrels invariably die of one thing, and
that is inflammation of the lungs; and nothing can cure them--they die
in a very few days.”

It did not seem to me possible that Peter had inflammation of the
lungs. There was no cough, no running at the nose--just emaciation and
feebleness and loss of appetite. I gave him milk with sugar in it every
day. He took a few tiny laps of it, and I thought it must be nourishing
and helpful. I learnt afterwards that milk was one of the worst things
to give. The books said that squirrels died of lung trouble “in a very
few days.” Peter was ill more than four weeks. Soon he became too
feeble to crack his nuts, so I cracked them for him; and he would eat
perhaps one and a half during the five or ten minutes he was out of the
sleeping-box in the mornings.

It was melancholy to see the effort it was to the poor little creature
to climb back to his nest. He had to wait for breath and for strength
four or five times before he finally disappeared.

[Illustration]

By the 14th February Ruby, who had hitherto kept well and sprightly,
though she also slept twenty-three hours and a half out of the
twenty-four--unlike Fritz, who was to be seen several times a day in
the coldest weather--Ruby, to my great grief, began to exhibit the
same signs of illness as poor little Peter had shown. Her coat became
rough and staring, her eyes sunken and dull, and her appetite nil.
She grew as emaciated as he, and as painfully feeble. Morning after
morning it was more and more difficult to her to clamber down from her
sleeping-box, and worse to clamber up again. She, too, lost strength
even to crack her nuts. In vain I bought grapes and every dainty I
could think of.

[Illustration]

It was too pitiful to see them. Squirrels, as a rule, will rarely or
never eat together--as one springs up another springs down. If these
two happened to be feeding at the same hour, it was always in different
parts of the cage or of my room. There seems a sort of etiquette about
this, and it is never transgressed. But the day before my little
squirrels died, I saw them both huddled together on the floor of the
cage. Peter’s little fore paw was over Ruby’s neck, and their piteous
helplessness and feebleness were very touching.

It may be asked, why did I not take them into the warmth of my room
when I first noticed something amiss? But I was afraid of adding to
their distress--I was so firmly convinced that animals prefer to be
let alone when they are out of sorts, and that nature cures in her own
way with plenty of sleep. The nesting-box was six or seven feet from
the floor of the cage and difficult to get at, through perches and the
branches of the shrub that grew up inside against the wall. I ought to
have unhooked the box and brought the squirrels inside altogether long
ago, when day after day there was a black frost and a bitter biting
north-east wind.

I believe now, looking back, that if I had done this I should not have
lost them; but they were so nervous and shy, I was afraid of worrying
and distressing them by changing their quarters.

Unfortunately, the wall of my pets’ cage faced north. The winter
sunshine used to shine for an hour or so a day upon the top of the
climbing pole, and in health this sunny perch used to be a favourite
place with them. But when they were ill they never attempted to climb
as high. Having quenched their thirst, and nibbled an atom of food,
they struggled painfully to regain their box, and hid away for the rest
of the day.

[Illustration]

I felt it cruel to disturb them--“Sick animals curl themselves up
and sleep alone in the dark,” thought I, “and they will be best left
unmolested.” Besides, as I have said before, Bunty and Fritz had lived
all through last winter in the same place, and I did not imagine that
it could be the cold that was killing these two, more especially as the
cold snap was all over--February came in mildly. Fritz used to come
bouncing in to pay me a visit in the highest health and spirits, and in
the garden squirrel-house was there not the future Mrs. Fritz extremely
lively? They had managed to keep themselves well in spite of black
frosts and biting winds.

[Illustration]

Anything more different than a sick squirrel from a healthy one cannot
be conceived. The eyes, instead of protruding like carriage lamps,
become flattened and then sunk in, giving the impression of blindness.
The whole expression of the face becomes altered from mischievous
sprightliness, an intense vivacity, to a miserable, dumb suffering. The
tail is never curled over the back, but hangs down dejectedly; the ears
are far apart; and the movements, instead of being electric springs
and jerks, are mere crawlings, and are evidently made with great
difficulty, exhausting the poor little creature very much.

I have watched Ruby, consumed with thirst, peer over from the edge of
her box, and let herself go with a feeble bundling sort of slither
down the pole always used for ascents and descents. She would leap
feebly, with pauses for breath between; and then, to watch her climb
up again used to break my heart. It was only too evident that she found
it a most exhausting performance. She would cling weakly, and wait
for breath and strength to crawl up a few steps; then wait again, and
finally hoist herself the few inches on to her box with panting effort.

[Illustration]

To see animals suffer like this, and to be powerless to help, throws
a black cloud over life for the time being. I longed for my pets to
die, and wondered if I could chloroform them. Every morning on waking I
hoped to find them gone.

The end came on the last day of February, about five weeks after I had
first noticed that Peter was not quite himself, and a little over a
fortnight since Ruby had begun to droop.

[Illustration]

And here let me say, in parenthesis, that I had written to the
authorities at the Zoo for advice. The reply I received was kind
and courteous; but said that probably my pets were suffering from
consumption, and that nothing could be done. Perhaps I might try
a little Benger’s food. Now with all due deference to the larger
experience and knowledge of the Zoological Society, if I had known how
important it is to keep little mammals warm enough in their sleeping
quarters in cold weather, and if I had taken mine in at the very first
signs of illness and kept them in a warm place like the conservatory, I
cannot help thinking that I should have saved them.

[Illustration]

I think it is commonly supposed that nothing can be done for sick
squirrels because the first incipient signs of illness _are not noticed
and dealt with in time_.

On the morning of the day they died neither of them came out of the
sleeping-box at all. So after a while, with a good deal of difficulty,
I unhooked the box from the wall, and brought it inside. When I opened
the lid and looked in, each little animal was crouching in its separate
compartment hiding its little face in the darkest corner.

Ruby was too far gone to resist when I picked her up and slipped her
inside a warm flannel cosy, with a hot water-bag under it.

When I turned my attention to Peter, he suddenly leapt out and flew
round the room in an agony of terror. He scrambled somehow up the
_portière_ over the door, where he used to go to hide long ago in his
babyhood, and then fell with a scream. He would not let me pick him up,
but pantingly struggled out of my reach. After a time the poor little
thing somehow found his way to the old serge bag behind the curtain.

I tried to feed Ruby with warm sweetened milk, but scarcely a drop went
down. Her little body was just skin and bone. She feebly snuggled away
into the farthest corner of the cosy.

[Illustration]

And so the miserable day dragged on. Towards evening I thought I
must try to get some food down Peter’s throat, for his strength in
scrambling round the room had amazed me, and I did not despair of
somehow pulling him round yet. He seemed sound asleep in the serge bag,
so I lifted him down very gently, and sitting on the floor with the bag
in my lap, I attempted to get a teaspoonful of milk near his little
nose. But the moment I touched him he _screamed_ and sprang out, biting
my finger with extraordinary strength as I tried to stop him.

[Illustration]

To my horror, he tore up the window curtain with amazing rapidity and
attempted to run along the pole, a thing he had not done for many
weeks. But his strength gave out, he lost his footing, clung on upside
down for a miserable second, then _fell_ with a scream upon the hard
wooden floor. With a look at me I shall never forget, he dragged
himself (for his hindquarters were now paralyzed) behind the chest of
drawers.

I moved the piece of furniture and got him to drag himself out, and
with a supreme effort to scramble into his box, which was on a chair
close by. When I lifted the lid, a minute or two later, he was dead.
He was curled up, with a queer little smile upon his face, as if
triumphant that he had defied me to the last, and I--I could only be
thankful that his sufferings and his terror were ended.

Ruby’s eyes were glazing when I looked at her a little later, and she
died quietly half an hour after Peter had breathed his last.

I sent their two little bodies to be post-mortemed to a veterinary
college in North London, kindly recommended by the Zoo people. The
verdict was that Peter had died of acute congestion of the lungs, and
Ruby of pneumonia, complicated by nephritis of some standing.

[Illustration]

People who love animals do not need to be told how remorse and grief
poisoned my days for some time.

Why had I, in my stupid human misunderstanding, sacrificed these little
lives?--changed the existence of these blithe, merry little creatures
into dumb, lengthened suffering?

I was glad Peter had bitten me--I deserved it--and I hope it was some
satisfaction to him to do it.

[Illustration: Laurence hid himself in the twinkling of an eye. _See
page 75._]




PART III. FREEDOM AND HAPPINESS.


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

FREEDOM AND HAPPINESS.

It will be remembered that I had obtained another squirrel as a mate
for Laurence when he should leave London and come to Hook Heath and
freedom. This little creature had arrived on the thirteenth of January;
had been kept in the conservatory while the bitter weather lasted; and
had been put into the garden squirrel-house on the twenty-eighth of
the month. I called her Sulky at first, for she remained so implacably
invisible; and, though food disappeared, I never caught a glimpse of
her for a fortnight. She was, as I have said, intended to be a mate for
Laurence; but after Ruby’s death I felt she must be given to Fritz,
and I must get another little lady for Laurence. So, the day after my
little pets died, I opened the door of the squirrel-house, and let the
captive free to go where she would.

[Illustration]

I had reason to believe, however, that for a week she sneaked back to
the squirrel-house every night to sleep; for nuts put in overnight were
gone before 7 a.m., and one morning I saw her slipping down from the
sleeping-box to make her breakfast.

I watched her afterwards get out and run along the fence, and then
think better of it, and come back and climb up to have another nap.

By midday, however, she was gone, nor did I see her again for more than
a fortnight. We had some very stormy weather, with high gales and snow
squalls, and I began to fear that she had got a chill and would die of
pneumonia, like poor little Rufina.

How should we ever know? She would creep into one of the deserted nests
in the wood, and there gasp out her little life as the two others had
done.

The only thing that gave me hope that she was alive and well, though
unseen, was Fritz’s cheerful behaviour, and the fact of his still
remaining in the wood and garden. For it was springtime, and surely, if
there had not been some attraction here, he would have been off to the
plantations across the heath, where there were plenty of little ladies
to be courted. His demeanour when he paid visits to my room--which he
did every day--was suggestive of happiness and of amorous thoughts.
He would cock his tail roguishly, and skip about and run up the
curtains--plainly “showing off.”

[Illustration]

I therefore hoped that, though I could not see her, he was aware of
Sulky’s presence, and was hugging to himself hopes of domestic bliss.

And, sure enough, one bright morning I peeped out at 6 a.m., to see
Fritz tearing across the lawn, as fast as his little legs could carry
him, towards the stump, where Sulky was boldly cracking nuts, looking
exceedingly well and pretty. I saw her lift the cocoanut shell with her
little fore paws from off the cob nuts, and she tucked in an excellent
breakfast. Fritz, being the gentleman he always was, would not disturb
her, but came up the ivy to me, where his antics betokened great
happiness.

From that day the name of Sulky was dropped, and became “Mrs. Fritz.”

       *       *       *       *       *

By the 17th March Miss Appleton required Laurence Housman no longer as
a model, so she brought him down to me at Hook Heath.

[Illustration]

She had secured his sleeping-box (while he was curled up in it for a
nap), wrapped it in thick brown paper, wired it across the holes, and
held it in her lap all the time in tubes and train.

“I suppose he is here, and I suppose he is alive,” she said when she
arrived; “but I have not heard the ghost of a sound, nor felt the
faintest wriggle in the box. I hope he has not died of fright!”

We put the package down for a moment upon the sofa, when, to our
amusement and relief, there immediately came forth squeaks and grunts
of expostulation.

“Poor little fellow! how cramped he must be,” we exclaimed; and
proceeded forthwith to place him, box and all, within the spacious
squirrel-house in the garden. This was safely accomplished by Smithers,
good man--as kind and interested in my pets as ever.

[Illustration]

In this abode Laurence remained till the 2nd May, when I set him free
altogether. But before giving him his liberty I had to get a mate for
him, so that there should be no excuse for fights with the masterful
Fritz. As Messrs. Devon and Co. took some time before they found what I
wanted (for she had to be a German, young, and healthy), Laurence had
to remain solitary for a month.

March 1914 was a dreadful month of gales, rain, and snow squalls; but
with the first days of April came spring-like warmth and brilliant
sunshine, and the wild squirrels visited the garden again.

One morning the dear little thing, whom I used to call Miss Fritz in
the summer of 1913, came dancing and skipping along the fence rails,
and I watched her at 6 a.m. from my bedroom window. She climbed the
big lime tree to have a look at the little shelf outside my casement,
where, as she well remembered, nuts were spread galore in the days of
her childhood last year. Yes! there they were, and down she ran and
made a dash for the wall and the sheltering ivy. Up she scrambled,
and in another moment was perched on the extreme corner of the ledge,
with her beautiful tail cocked over her back, and an almond clutched
in her little claws. She let me stand quite close, not a foot away,
with the window wide open; and oh! how pretty and small and dainty she
looked to my eyes, accustomed for so many months to the coarser build
and shaggier fur of the Germans. Her little face was so appealing and
baby-like, her nut-coloured fur so soft, and her tail so fluffy!

[Illustration]

She knew me again quite well; looked at me with recognition in her
brilliant black eyes; and presently, dropping the empty shell of her
almond, she came hesitatingly to the inside ledge of the window,
stretching out her nose to sniff at me--to make quite sure that I was
in very truth her old friend; and, having satisfied her little mind,
she picked up a walnut and concentrated her attention upon it. I
stood beside her there for ten minutes, till she had finished all the
provender except one cob nut, which she carefully hid in the ivy. Then
she raced down to coquette with poor Laurence, who in his garden-cage
was doing his wild best to excite her attention. Round and round the
wire she darted, sniffing nose to nose with him and “twizzling” her
plumy tail. Every now and then I heard squeaks and exclamations. Then
they started a sort of hide-and-seek, she outside, he inside. I felt
very sorry for him, and longed to let him out; but his peace, let alone
his life, would not have been worth a moment’s purchase with Fritz in
the wood.

Two days before this, Laurence had got out. The little door of his
house, though shut, had not been bolted, and with a sudden burst of
summer-like sunshine and high wind the rain-swollen wood had shrunk,
and was easily burst open when pressed by his eager paws. I did not see
him go. He must have skipped off very early indeed; but about 10 a.m. I
happened to be looking out of the window, and was suddenly aware of two
hurrying furry forms across the ground. Poor Laurence was tearing for
all he was worth towards the shelter of his lately forsaken house, and
Fritz was after him, with murder in his eyes.

[Illustration]

I clapped my hands and shouted, startling them both and diverting
Fritz’s attention. He sprang up a tree, and Laurence hid himself in
the twinkling of an eye. I saw Master Fritz watching intently for a
few moments, and wrathfully “twisting his tail” (as a young friend of
mine puts it). His rival remaining invisible, however, I soon saw him
skipping leisurely back along his tree footpath to Mrs. Fritz in the
wood.

Half an hour later I perceived Laurence stealthily making his way along
the fence towards his house, where nuts were plentifully spread. (I
suspect he had not had much of a breakfast.) I fled downstairs and
out in time to see his tail drawn neatly through the open door, as he
seized a cob nut and sat up to enjoy it. He scarcely noticed me as I
bolted him in--only too thankful, I fancy, to find himself once more
where were plenty of nuts and no Fritz.

       *       *       *       *       *

Towards the end of March--to be accurate, on the 22nd--I see in a
note in my squirrel diary that Laurence wakened and was busy over his
breakfast at 6 a.m., and that Fritz came along, and, perching on the
heather thatch of his house, swore fiercely at him, twisting his tail
with rage. He heeded not my call, nor the rattle of nuts on my window
sill; but burrowed his nose into the heather, in vain attempts to come
to close quarters with his enemy. Laurence swished his tail too, and
returned his compliments with interest; but, finding it impossible
to fight, he presently turned his back on Fritz and resumed his nut
cracking--with a lofty contempt for the other--and Fritz had to come up
to me to be fed and consoled.

[Illustration]

At last Laurence’s bride arrived, and as had happened before with the
various pairs under observation, she soon took the best of everything.
Laurence was turned out of his sleeping-box; she stole all his best
nuts; and invariably made him wait till she had finished her meals,
leaving only the refuse for him.

She arrived on the seventeenth of April, and I opened the cage door
to set them both free after she had had a fortnight to get used
to the sight of the house and the human beings in the garden, and
to understand that food and water were always to be found in that
particular place.

I also made a little hole in the thatched roof--as squirrels like to
have two entrances to their abodes--and Laurence immediately set out to
enjoy his liberty. I soon saw his little head emerging from the hole
at the top, and I watched his furtive joy as he capered about among
the foxgloves and periwinkles below, and finally was lost to my sight
clambering up a cherry tree. Mrs. Laurence, on the contrary, was quite
a week before she quitted the cage. She preferred to remain where food
was abundant, and where her comfortable sleeping-box kept her snug at
night.

When at length she did venture forth with her husband into the unknown,
she still stole back for several nights to her safe shelter. But at
last, I suppose, they built between them a nest in the wood, for I
constantly saw Laurence very busily tearing strips of fibre from the
trees just then, and the cage was finally deserted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Squirrels are very busy in the spring stripping bark for making new
nests, and in the summer this is sometimes carried on for remaking and
mending the old.

They generally choose damp rainy days for doing this, when the material
they gather is full of moisture. Once, however, in a spell of prolonged
hot dry weather, I was much struck with a clever device on the part of
one of them, probably Fritz.

I found one morning two little bundles of stripped fibre thrust into
the jar of drinking water inside the garden squirrel-house. (The
entrance to this was always left open, and the squirrels ran in and
out for food and water.)

There was no mistaking these neat little bundles. I had too often
watched Bunty, Fritz, Rufina, and Co. not to know the look of them,
with the ends tucked in, in the form of a little bolster. I left the
packages there, grasping at once that the weather being so dry the
fibre had become too stiff and hard to be easily woven, hence the
bringing of these bundles to the water and leaving them to soak. They
remained there for two or three days, then one was carried off, and a
day or two later the second disappeared.

[Illustration: She coquetted with the birds round the drinking pan.
_See page 83._]

[Illustration]

What made the performance more interesting was that this special fibre
was only obtained from one particular tree, a certain conifer which
grew on the other side of the garden. Fritz had been frequently seen in
the spring stripping the fibre from this half-dead tree, the only one
of its kind we had. In carrying his little bundles from it to where
he placed them to soak, he would pass two birds’ drinking pans full
of water; but they were in public places on the lawn, and constantly
bathed in by all sorts of birds. Fritz--if it was he, and I very much
suspect it was--preferred the comparative secrecy and seclusion of the
small water-jar in the squirrel-house in the back garden. His sagacity
was justified, for no one meddled with them till he considered them to
be sufficiently moistened for weaving purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *

One hot afternoon under the weeping tree there was coolness and shade.
Half drowsily I was reading the Saturday _Westminster_, when I was
aware--I can’t say I heard it, for it was so slight--but I was aware
of a minute noise. It was not the fitful summer breeze swaying the
hanging branches of my sanctuary, nor the scratches of birds under
the rhododendrons in a vain quest for worms. I lifted my head very
cautiously, and twisted it slowly towards the rough stem of the
white-blossomed acacia, twenty feet away. Yes, up in a fork of the
branches was a bit of brown fur. Part of it seemed to be quivering
incessantly. The tiny noise I heard was the dropping of a nutshell on
the grass. The quivering I saw was a little jaw nibbling very fast.
Presently there was a flashing movement, and out into the sunshine
she came, a beautiful, brilliant foxy red, with a tail which put her
husband’s to shame, for this was Mrs. Fritz.

[Illustration]

With electric jerky motions she came down the tree stem and clawed
out another nut from the crevices, and swung head downward easily and
securely, her hind feet firmly clenching the deeply-grooved bark. Nut
after nut she searched out from where I had hidden them, and then,
catching sight of me, she swiftly and noiselessly put herself out of
sight.

Presently, as I remained very still, she plucked up more courage and
skipped down to the grass. Here for some minutes she coquetted--there
is no other word for it--she coquetted with the birds round the
drinking pan. After many feints, advancing and retreating, she buried
her nose in the cool, sparkling water, and took a long, long drink.
Eyeing me through the veil of green which dropped round me, she
suddenly made up her frisky mind to dare all and come to the nut tray
close to my seat.

She rushed towards me in a tremendous hurry as if afraid of changing
her mind again, her tail straight out behind her, and in two seconds
was within touching distance of my hand. I kept rigid, and watched out
of half-closed eyes. She stood up on her flexible hind feet and reached
out a quivering, sniffling little nose in my direction, trembling all
over with fear and curiosity. But as the dreaded human smell reached
her moist nostrils, she turned and darted like an arrow under the
shelter of a thick rhododendron. Here she hid, and I saw her bright
eyes peeping out at me behind the leaves. I still remained motionless,
and presently was aware of a noiseless furry form vanishing up the
holly tree which leans against some of the outer branches of the beech.

The long hanging green around me shook a moment, and by that I knew
that she had jumped from the holly to the beech, and was somewhere
above my head. I moved imperceptibly so as to look upwards, and close
above me was a little white stomach with a fiery tail cocked over a
chestnut back.

And now she began to scold and stamp her feet and lash her tail; but
seeing that I kept calm and moved not an eyelash, she made for the
nuts, and sat up within a yard of my chair cracking and devouring them
one by one.

I was immensely pleased, as this was the first time since I let her go
three months ago that I had seen Mrs. Fritz so near.

       *       *       *       *       *

There came a day at the end of June when Fritz brought a son and heir
to the nuts on the stump. The stump, I must explain, was near the
squirrel-house in the back garden, and was in full view of my window.
The youngster was a lovely colour, almost orange, with a smart bushy
tail. Fritz at this time was changing his tail, and was a lamentable
object in that respect--his spiny little appendix had hardly a hair on
it. I was amused at his elderly paterfamilias ways--“twizzling” his
bald tail in mock anger, and carefully hiding away several nuts for
future occasions. And this reminds me that I never saw him bury his
nuts as the Surrey squirrels did. He preferred to hide them in the
forks of the trees, or in the ivy, or in deserted birds’ nests.

[Illustration]

I have forgotten to say that when Laurence’s mate arrived in the
middle of April it was Smithers who received her, and put her into the
squirrel-house in the garden, for I was spending Easter amid the deep
green lanes of Devonshire.

There, one hot spring morning, as I was lying on moss and whortleberry,
under the shoulder of Mutter’s Moor, I watched a wild squirrel running
up a larch. It was soon hidden from view in the tree’s delicate green
branches--and what is more exquisite than the earliest green of the
larch? I heard the delicious scrabble of little claws on the bark,
while about me droned the big bumble-bees and their quick-working
cousins of the hive, all intent on honey-getting. I was puzzled to know
where the honey was to be found, till I saw that the whortleberry was
full of innumerable tiny crimson bell-flowers.

[Illustration]

It was a wonderful Easter. After “the wettest March on record” April
came in hot and brilliant, with a steady east wind that dried up the
saturated ground.

[Illustration]

In every sheltered valley and “goyle” the trees rushed into leaf. The
birch shook out her fairy tassels, and larches lit up the hillsides
with their vivid green lace. Everywhere the busy birds flew in and out
of the hedges, intent on nest-making. The rooks cawed from morning to
night, the jackdaws “chucked,” and sea-gulls sailed aloft exchanging
their wild free calls in the blue. It was a joy to live.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in Surrey again after a cold spell--“the tail of winter in the
middle of May”--the icy wind dropped, and a still, hot day soothed our
ruffled nerves, and warmed our shivering bodies once more. Early one
morning wild Miss Tito paid me a second visit. She came to the bedroom
window, and allowed me to stand close beside her, while she cracked her
favourite Barcelona nuts.

When her back was turned, and her eyes shielded by her lovely tail, I
gently unfastened the casement and very slowly pushed it out, holding
my breath and body very still, when she quickly jerked round to see
what was happening. I then backed quietly into the shadow of the room,
having placed more nuts on a chair. Presently, her nut finished, and no
more to be found under the inverted cocoanut in spite of her vigorous
nose-pushings, her wee intelligent face peeped inside the casement, two
little fore paws appeared, and then she jumped upon the chair to seize
a nut--skipping outside again to crack it. I crept back into bed, and
lay still. Then she came again, jumped down upon the blue carpet, and
executed a sort of _pas seul_--pitter-patter--and back. She had not
been inside my room since last September--eight months ago!

Through the autumn and winter I had scarcely seen her, even in the
garden. With Tito and Tara I suppose she had been driven away by
the masterful Fritz. As mentioned already, in April she had once
reappeared, and had even clambered up the ivy to breakfast at the
old place. But this running about in my room to-day showed that she
had not forgotten the spring of 1913, when she was such a fearless
little visitor that I once caught her, and put her for ten days in the
squirrel-house, in a vain attempt to tame her altogether--an attempt
which, as I have explained in a former book, completely failed.

To return, however, to this particular morning, she came in and out
several times till the nuts were finished, and then took a bit of brown
bread in her mouth, and hid it in the curtains before she finally
departed. Afterwards I saw her in the lime tree licking her little
paws, and cleaning her whiskers assiduously.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

“There’s a boy downstairs with some baby squirrels in his pocket, and
he says will you buy one, and he has sold the others already, and will
you tell him how to feed them?”

This from an excited child who came bounding to my door, the morning
holidays began, and we were all going away from home.

I went downstairs and found a bright-eyed, sturdy little chap of nine,
who held in his hand a tiny bit of fur, with a fuzzy turned-up tail,
and a pair of sharp tufted ears. Putting it on the kitchen table--where
it darted about in electric fashion, saved from falling off the edge
every minute by eager hands--the boy pulled another, and another, and
yet another out of his pockets, and then diving into a basket on the
floor, he produced three more. Seven furry infants! I gasped. The
heartlessness of it! What were the bereaved and distracted parents
doing?

I questioned him wrathfully, as I dashed round the table, with others,
to prevent imminent catastrophes. The electric movements spread all
over the broad surface of the kitchen table.

[Illustration]

“Where did you get them?”

“Out in the fir plantations on the heath, Miss. Oi cloimed up a tree
and put me ’and in the nestises. Oi let one fall, and ’e doid.”

Some one brought warmed milk in a soup plate, and we placed the seven
wee things round it, dipping their noses in, as one does with kittens,
to make them lap. Three tackled the food at once; tiny pink tongues
shot out, tiny tails curled comfortably over backs. The others were
too feeble, and too young to understand; they were palpitating, and
fell over as fast as they were put upon their four legs. Poor little
innocents, taken away far too young from their mothers and their dark,
warm nests! I saw they would not live; already two were in convulsions.

I was furious with the boy. But what was to be done? He had already
sold most of them for a shilling apiece, on condition he reared
them for the first week himself. He had heard that I knew all about
squirrels, and came to me for instructions about food.

[Illustration]

I warned him as emphatically as I knew how against overfeeding, and
pointed out the absolute necessity of plenty of sleep, warmth, and
_no_ handling. But what was the use? He had seven little brothers
and sisters at home. They all wanted to cuddle the squirrels; they
all wanted to feed them. Two died that evening, three followed their
example next day, and by the day after not one was left alive.

It was impossible for me to have taken them myself. I was going a
long journey to friends--whom I love, but whose prime aversion is
pet animals! Our house was being shut up, and Smithers, with all his
kindness and patience, firmly declined a responsibility in my absence
that entailed getting up at 4 a.m. to give food, and that in any case
was by no means an easy task. Baby squirrels are notoriously difficult
to rear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in the month found me once more established with books and work
in my old summer quarters under the weeping beech on the lawn.

The beech had been, as usual, the last to come out; while larches,
limes, and chestnuts had flung open their treasures and burst into
spring loveliness almost before the middle of that wonderful April,
the beech, still shrinking and coy, had kept her little brown sheaths
wrapped tightly round her buds. But by the second week in May, after
“Winter’s tail” had fled, she hung out all her delicate green; and
her swaying tresses swept the turf around me, as I sat alone in the
sweetness and promise of yet another spring.

[Illustration]

Sparrows, thrushes, and robins were busy feeding young broods;
chaffinches and blue tits were still sitting on their eggs; the spotted
flycatchers had not yet arrived. Forget-me-nots, violas, and irises
made a sea of blue and purple, seen through the pendent branches of my
sanctuary. White broom leant over with its fairy flowerets, and back
amongst the evergreens glowed the crimson of early rhododendrons.

Presently there was a scolding and chattering above my head, and I
looked up to see Fritz, who had, I suppose, come by his usual overland
route along the tree tops, and was minded to come down to the tray at
my elbow for nuts. He did not like the look of my rug and cushions,
and was apparently trying to stamp at and scold them out of his way.
Finding them immovable and harmless, however, he came leaping down for
almonds and walnuts, and as I talked to him his nervousness ceased, and
we were both happy.

After he had gone came the conscientious robin, who just now was hard
at it feeding her newly-fledged young. I helped her, at intervals,
all day in the performance of this duty, with currants, oatmeal, and
cheese. Scarcely did she allow herself a morsel, so intent was she
upon the needs of her brood. As she waited expectantly for my dole
another robin flew down. They did not fight, so I presumed this was
a cock, and I watched his antics to attract her with considerable
amusement.

[Illustration]

First, he sang to her, a little low whispering song, swaying his head
and neck to and fro, in an extraordinary manner bowing and sidling.

As, perfectly unconcerned, she continued assiduously picking up
invisible insects for her children, he changed his tactics, and, flying
to a branch above, he cocked up his tail, and trilled a loud jubilant
strain. Nothing moved by this exhibition, she simply ignored him, and
he flew away in disgust.

[Illustration: Seven furry infants!... The heartlessness of it! _See
page 90._]

I named him Robin Adair, because the garden was so dull when he was not
there, and he became eventually the most persistent little visitor. He
caused me to waste no end of time, for just as I had settled down
in the garden with writing or work, there he would be in an instant,
silently arriving out of nowhere.

Perched upon the open lid of my dispatch case, he would eye me with a
determined expression there was no mistaking. It said plainly, “Where
are my worms? Here I sit till you produce them. Be quick, please; my
family is waiting.” And I would have to get up, and go inside and bring
out the tin which contained his meal-worms. This I would place on my
knee, and take up my pen again, meaning really to write. But his dainty
little flutterings, his wee spindly legs, his beautiful plumage, and
his dew-bright eye were invariably too fascinating and too distracting.
I would leave off my writing a hundred times, to admire him and talk
to him. He was a most devoted father. He plied to and from the nest
where his little ones were all day long, and when one remembers that
a bird’s day at this time of year begins at 4 a.m., and lasts till 5
or 6 p.m., it will be admitted that this involves a tremendous amount
of energy. Very occasionally did Robin Adair give himself the treat
of swallowing one of the meal-worms which he was given. Sometimes
the delicious taste of the worm quite demoralized him, and he would
gulp down three or even four in succession. But to do him justice,
this happened but rarely. I found out where his nest was, and once I
commissioned some one else to dole out the worms, while I went behind
the shrubbery to watch the little hole, almost indistinguishable, on
the ground beneath the furze bushes in the field. He arrived with a fat
worm in his beak; but the expression in his black eyes the moment he
saw me so near his home was extremely angry. In a second he flew off
and hid. I waited and waited. Then _I_ hid, and peered through the
furze; but though he had hopped upon a twig nearer the nest, he spotted
me again instantly, and nothing would induce him to go in. He must have
warned his children, too, somehow, for though at other times I had seen
four little gaping mouths, all was silence and darkness now.

[Illustration]

His cleverness in carrying several worms at once was remarkable, as
each had to be killed before it was given to his babies. This entailed
a good deal of manipulation with his beak, biting and striking the
ground. I have constantly seen him doing this, and finally carrying
four worms in a row, to save the trouble of four journeys.

He became absolutely fearless while the very dry weather of June
lasted, as all ordinary worms refused to come to the surface of the
earth; and he would have got none at all but for my tin box. Not only
would he perch on my shoe, or on the box in my lap, but I trained
him to peck them out of my hand. Currants dipped in oatmeal, cheese,
and gingerbread made pleasant changes of diet, and helped to save the
worms, or he would have carried off hundreds in the course of the day.

[Illustration]

He was always with me, appearing, as I have said, suddenly and swiftly
out of nowhere; in whatever part of the garden I placed my chair, there
close to me in half a second would be the dapper little creature, trim,
neat, and alert. He was never dishevelled like the sparrows, and when
in the late afternoon it would seem as if he must be exhausted, he
would go and take an energetic bath, and come and sit beside me to dry
his feathers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes for days together the garden was forsaken by the squirrels;
but to make up for their absence, many little episodes of bird life
amused me as I sat out of doors in the sun and the wind.

[Illustration]

The tits were shameless thieves, and their ingenuity was surprising.
I have watched one of these tiny birds manipulating--if one can use
such a word in connection with a beak--a cocoanut shell, which had been
turned over upon some nuts on purpose to keep them from him. Cob nuts
or walnuts he could not tackle, but almonds were not safe from him, and
monkey nuts he was determined to have. I saw him mount the cocoanut
shell, and with his head on one side peer into the hole at the top.
Satisfied that the coveted food was beneath it, he began to try to lift
the heavy shell. With his little beak he pecked and pulled manfully at
the outside fibre. He could just raise the shell, but not high enough
to get what he wanted.

After a good deal of exertion, which only shuffled it about on the
stump, he flew off for a minute’s rest and reflection. Then he tackled
it again, leaning down and pushing his beak sideways under the edge,
pecking valiantly, and every now and then mounting the nut to peer
through the hole to make sure that what he wanted was still there.

[Illustration]

The stump on which the shell was placed had a sloping surface, and to
prevent the squirrels’ food from rolling off, a ledge had been put on
two sides and across the bottom. Presently I was amazed to see that the
small bird had succeeded in wriggling and shuffling the cocoanut till
he had tilted it up upon this ledge. Out rolled the monkey nut from
beneath, and he flew away with it in triumph. I then heard a vigorous
knocking going on, a little way off, and saw him in a shrub banging the
nut against the trunk to break the pod. Having made an opening, he held
it firmly on a branch with one little claw, and feasted royally. This
exploit, from the time he first tackled the cocoanut till he got the
monkey nut out, took him just a quarter of an hour.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was during this summer of 1914 that I saw, for the first time in my
life, a young cuckoo in a nest.

[Illustration]

Parting the furze bushes one day I came upon a linnet’s nest,
moss-built and tiny. There seemed to be a weird sort of an eye looking
over the top of it, and I touched the rim. To my amazement half a
foot of ruffled black and white shot up like a Jack-in-the-box, and
an orange-coloured maw and throat opened wide and hissed angrily.
It was quite formidable, and looked enormous compared with its wee
foster-parents, but I have no doubt they were immensely proud of it. We
had a tennis tournament that day, and I think about fifty young people
must have visited the furze bush. The excitement could not have been
very good for the poor creature. For the next two days he remained dull
and sleepy, and entirely declined to shoot himself up, or even to open
his lovely orange mouth. The third day found him flown. The little
mossy cup was empty-and time too, I should say; with such a swelling
bulk, I wonder the walls had not burst.

I think we may disabuse our minds of the traditional belief in the
wickedness of the cuckoo _mère_, and of the supposed grief and distress
of the youngster’s foster-parents. It seems to me much more likely
that, instead of considering it a misfortune to find a cuckoo’s egg in
their nests, our British birds only hope for such luck, and swell with
pride as they rear a magnificent chick, under the delusion that it is
their own.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

One very hot morning in June I was the interested spectator of a
mother tit showing her offspring how to bathe. The family party were
unaware of my presence. There were five young hopefuls--all sons, I
should imagine, for they were bigger than their active little mother.
All had been born and reared in a “Brent Valley Bird Sanctuary”
nesting-box, on a holly tree close by. The mother’s darker, more
pronounced colouring, longer tail, and determined expression of
countenance betrayed her matronhood. The children were delicious balls
of pale green and gray, with tiny black markings, and their innocent
and timid little faces were fascinating as they clustered round the
large earthenware saucer, full of water, in which the mother was
splashing.

[Illustration]

Her energy was astounding. She flapped and ducked and soused herself
till she had not a dry feather, then flew out and told them to go in.
Not a bit of it! The little cowards hopped upon the saucer’s edge,
stooped till their beaks touched the water, then turned right about
face, and looked gravely at their claws. They flew or hopped across
the saucer many times, but had not courage to plunge in. Back flew the
mother, hustled them away, and launched herself once more. They watched
her, and then began to imitate her movements--in the grass! The lawn
just there was thickly covered with fallen blossoms from a white
acacia, as also was the water in the saucer. The babies ducked and
quivered their wings, and bent up and down, and quirked imaginary drops
of water over their little backs. Out flew the mother, and perched on
a foxglove stalk, and into the water went a siskin, and thoroughly
enjoyed himself--but not for long; back came the mother tit, routed
him, and called to her little ones not to be outdone by a siskin. She
ducked and splashed, and twinkled and sprinkled all over again, till
she was a drenched little object; but beyond crouching near her, so as
to catch some of her splashings on themselves, not one of her children
had nerve enough to take a bath that morning. The last that I saw of
them, they were all five crouching and busily imitating her movements
amongst the grass and acacia blossoms; their shrill little voices,
could I have understood them, were probably calling out:

“We are trying, mother! we are indeed! Look at us! We’re doing just
what you do!”

       *       *       *       *       *

On the tenth of June, to my joy, my pretty turtle-doves appeared again.
I called them my Bible doves--

  _“As the wings of a dove covered with silver,
    And her pinions with yellow gold.”_

For there is a silvery sheen about them, and a glint of gold in their
plumage.

This was the third summer that they had come to the garden and nested
in the wood. Such delicate lovely creatures! They came to drink, and to
pick up the small corn which I scattered for them every day on the lawn.

The lovely fawn colour of their breasts, melting into lavender on their
heads, the blue and black bars on their necks, their ruby eyes, and
dainty rose-coloured feet were a joy to behold--a feast of exquisite
colouring.

[Illustration]

They were very shy, and, on their first arrival, the sight or sound of
a human being made them instantly take fright; but as time went on they
became accustomed to me, and would, as long as I kept still, approach
quite close to my chair.

Though I searched the wood many times I never could find their nest. It
was well hidden.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now autumn is approaching, with its splendour of amber and gold, of
crimson and brown. There is great activity in the squirrel world. Young
and old are busy storing and burying nuts.

Early in the dewy mornings they hie themselves to the hazel coppices,
to the lordly beeches, and later they will strip the walnuts. Active
little creatures, intent upon this their supreme instinct, I have known
a pair entirely clear away the beech-mast under the weeping tree on our
lawn on a September morning before breakfast--beech-mast which thickly
covered the ground the night before.

Fritz and Laurence Housman, too, are now disporting the full glory
of their autumn tails. Mrs. Fritz and Mrs. Laurence are teaching the
little Fritzes and the little Laurences where and how to hide the
winter food. Soon they will be stripping the fibre from the old conifer
in the shrubbery, and mending up their snug little homes in the wood,
ready for the short days and the long cold nights.

Good-bye, gay and care-free little friends! Good-bye! My way lies
south, by the sea, where no squirrels come.

FINIS.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Based on research, this book was most likely published in 1915, but
possibly in 1916.

The illustrator for this book was Honor C. Appleton.

Illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks near where they are
mentioned.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication.





End of Project Gutenberg's More About the Squirrels, by Eleanor Tyrrell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MORE ABOUT THE SQUIRRELS ***

***** This file should be named 51031-0.txt or 51031-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/0/3/51031/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

